
Re: [priv_coal] Newborn screening bill pits medical groups against privacy rights advocates

Bob Gellman  Today at 10:48 AM

To  Michelle De Mooy  All Staff  Privacy Coalition

It is indeed an interesting case.  I thought that others who read this story might benefits from the views of a geneticist involved with newborn screening programs and policy.  Dr. Carol Greene (full disclosure:  my wife!) says:

I think the story is fair and the characterization of the opposition to the bill as "theoretical fear mongering" is appropriate.

Aside from use of stored samples for the rare instances like that described in the story to understand the cause of a child's death, there is also the potential use of stored samples to identify the remains of a child's decomposed body, when no other type of identification might be possible.

Most important - and well described in the story - is the need for stored samples for test development in each state.  Without stored samples, it is not possible to bring on-line new life-saving tests.  The number of deaths in Minnesota from severe combined immunodeficiency from the delay in introduction of that test sounds like the expected number of babies to be born annually and die from that treatable condition.

Samples are also needed for continuous quality assessment and improvement.  Currently the lab in Minnesota is (as I understand it) is required to destroy all samples with normal (negative) results after a 71 days from receipt of test.  Laboratories do regular quality control testing on a daily basis, and on a regular schedule they receive test samples from outside to monitor their proficiency (I think for some tests that is quarterly and for some tests it may be less freqent.)  If external quality control testing is done quarterly, that is about 90+ days.  So if the lab finds they have an issue, they have not been allowed to save samples reaching back to the last external quality control testing, to see when the problem may have first arisen.  In fact, if they have to destroy all the records, they don't even know who might need to be retested.

By the way, as I understand it, the current law in Minnesota requires not only the destruction of the sample, but the destruction of the information.  Imagine that you have had a once-in-a-lifetime test and the laboratory is required to destroy the results on the principle that your doctor has received the information - but your doctor retires or the records are destroyed and now you have no idea what are the results of your medical test.

And the bill before the legislature right now in Minnesota, as I understand it, would still permit parents to ask to have the samples destroyed if that is their preference.

I pretty much agree with Carol here (good thing, too!). Some role for consent with newborn samples and screening is appropriate to deal with those who have objections, and Minnestoa does that. But there's nothing sinister going on with the info/samples, and you have to keep in mind that there's plenty of use of other patient information for research and other purposes. In perspective, the newborn screening activities aren't really much different. And in the near future when gentic sequencing is a more routine part of medicine, newborn screening may raise no separate issues at all.

In the health arena, I don't think it is possible or practical to obtain affirmative consent for everything today. It would require too many decisions that patients cannot make (or wouldn't want to make if given the opportunity), and today's health care system can't handle that much choice.  A better designed system could do better in handling choice, but choices have to be systematized and simplified or no one will be able to manage it. 

There is a legitimate societal decision about whether the use of health info for the common good (public health, health oversight, research) outweighs individual interests in some, many, or all cases.  I'd feel better about making these decisions and/or overriding or ignoring patient choice here if I knew that all recipients of patient data were subject to privacy and security rules.  In many cases, health researchers are NOT subject to HIPAA or any other privacy or security rules. That is bad.  I think that the Minnesota law places rules on the state's newborn screening program (which is probably not subject to HIPAA), but I haven't looked at the details.

Bob



On 3/18/2014 4:43 PM, Michelle De Mooy wrote:
An interesting genetic privacy case in Minnesota...

Michelle

Michelle De Mooy
Senior Associate, National Priorities
CONSUMER ACTION

michelle.demooy@consumer-action.org
301-244-5081 voice
270-573-4104 fax
www.consumer-action.org
facebook.com/consumeraction
twitter.com/consumeraction

Newborn screening bill pits medical groups against privacy rights advocates

http://www.postbulletin.com/news/politics/newborn-screening-bill-pits-medical-groups-against-privacy-rights-advocates/article_bff83174-5402-55a8-9950-ee1af115e8b5.html

Posted: Tuesday, March 18, 2014 9:03 am | Updated: 2:48 pm, Tue Mar 18, 2014.

Heather J. Carlson, hcarlson@postbulletin.com

ST. PAUL — For Stacy Nugent, a few drops of blood collected from her daughter in her first days of life offered one last chance of solving a devastating mystery.

On March 10, 2010, Nugent's 2-year-old daughter, Paige, died in her sleep. Doctors were unable to determine what caused her death, labeling it Sudden Unexplained Death in Childhood.

Four years later, Nugent is determined to get answers about what happened in order to protect her second daughter, Presley, who is now 2. When Nugent learned about the blood sample taken from her daughter, she saw it as her last and best chance of finding out what might have gone wrong. So in February, the mom from Blaine contacted the Minnesota Department of Health to request the blood spots. She was stunned to learn the blood spots had been destroyed the day before.

"I thought, 'How can you destroy those without me knowing about it, and what gives you the right to do that when this is the last piece that remained of my daughter,'" she said.

A bill sponsored by Rochester DFL Rep. Kim Norton would allow the state health department to store these newborn blood spots indefinitely unless a parent opts out. The measure was narrowly approved this morning by the House Civil Law Committee and is headed to the House floor.

Science vs. privacy

Norton's bill is the latest in what has been a long-running fight at the Capitol between privacy rights advocates and medical professionals over the state's newborn screening. The program dates to 1965 and involves pricking the heels of newborns to collect a few drops of blood 24 hours to 48 hours after they are born. Those blood spots are placed on a special screening card and analyzed for more than 50 disorders.

Historically, those blood spots were stored indefinitely and used to help develop tests to identify other disorders. But everything changed in 2006, when lawmakers passed a genetic privacy law that required informed written consent for the collection, storage and use of genetic information.

The Minnesota Supreme Court ruled in 2011 that the use of the blood spots for anything other than the initial screening was not allowed under current state statute. In January, the Minnesota Department of Health announced it had reached a settlement with 21 families suing the department over the program. That agreement involved the destruction of 1.1 million archived blood spots.

In 2012, Minnesota lawmakers passed legislation to allow the department to hold blood spots with negative test results for 71 days. All blood samples are automatically destroyed after two years unless parents approve allowing the spots to be stored longer. In the past, Mayo Clinic did the bulk of the newborn screening testing for the state. This year, the clinic lost the contract to Pennsylvania-based PerkinElmer.

Norton's bill gives parents the chance to opt out of having their child's blood spot stored. It also requires parental consent for any research done on the blood spots not related to the newborn screening program. She said her legislation would help return Minnesota to its status as a national leader in newborn screening and save children's lives.

"Five thousand children in the state of Minnesota are alive and healthy because of the blood spot tests we do," she said.

Wrong direction

But critics of the measure argue it undoes privacy protections put into place for parents and children. Twila Brase, president of the Citizens' Council for Health Care Freedom, said Norton's bill places the burden on parents to understand how their babies' genetic material may be used at what is a very stressful time. Instead, the state should continue to require informed consent when it comes to the storage of blood spots.

"This is not the direction that we should be moving," she said. "The state should be requiring informed consent. To do anything else is a violation of the child's genetic privacy, the mother's genetic privacy, the DNA property rights of the child and the parents' right to protect the child."

Norton's bill has the strong backing of several medical organizations, including the Mayo Clinic. Dr. Robert Jacobson, president of the Minnesota chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics and a Mayo Clinic primary care physician, said allowing the long-term storage of these blood spots is the academy's No. 1 priority.
He said the rapid destruction of blood spots prevents parents and physicians from going back to the screening data to look for valuable information. It also hurts the state's ability to develop new tests to identify potentially fatal disorders that, with treatment, can save lives and prevent lifelong disabilities. For example, a lack of blood spots delayed by a year the roll out of a new test to identify severe combined immunodeficiency, a rare group of congenital disorders that impair the immune system. During that time, at least four children in the state are known to have died from that disorder.

"Can you imagine going to the doctor and finding out your doctor threw your medical records away after two years or the lab burned all the blood you had drawn?" he asked. "You and I would call it malpractice, but here, we have a state law that requires it. It's really irresponsible and dangerous and it's hurting babies."
Jacobson accuses opponents of engaging in "theoretical fear mongering" to kill the measure.

Among those lining up to testify on the bill today will be Nugent. She said she will keep sharing her family's painful story in the hopes it convinces lawmakers of the importance of preserving these blood spots.

"If there is another parent that is going to have to go through this nightmare, I want to make sure that the system is there to take care of them at the worst time."






-- 
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
+ Robert Gellman       <bob@bobgellman.com> +
+ Privacy and Information Policy Consultant +
+ 419 Fifth Street SE                       +
+ Washington, DC 20003                      +
+ 202-543-7923           www.bobgellman.com
 +
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
                        
